>> Richard Feldman: Let's do an exercise.
All right, so as usual, we're gonna start
off by just building the thing here.
So it says, "Should be
blog/index.html": "/blog/index.html".
This is the world's cheapest unit
test suite [LAUGH] we've got here.
So it's printing out what it expects and
then it's printing out
what it actually is.
This one says, Should be blog/index.html,
but it says /blog/index.html.
So both of these are actually
slightly incorrect right now.
There's a little bit of
an off-by-one error.
So there's this old joke,
you may have heard of it.
The old joke is, what are the two
hardest things in programming?
And they are cache and validation,
naming things on off-by-one errors.
This is an example of an off-by-one error.
So we've almost got it right,
but we just had this,
there's this little slash that's sticking
around and we wanna get rid of that.
So that's part of the exercise,
is fixing that.
Here, we have index.html is what we
expect, but again, there's this,
there's that /index.html.
And then finally,
this last one we want to be null, but
instead it's /blog/index.html.
So in this exercise, we're basically
gonna be doing some bug fixing.
Okay, so this right here might
look familiar from the slides,
this is exactly the same
stuff we're doing there.
We have char *start and end.
We've got our to_path functions
taking in the request address, right?
The for loop, where we start off
at the beginning of the request,
we keep going until we hit a space,
just start++ along the way.
If we encounter a null byte, which
we're using the syntax for that, then
really return null rather than continuing
to read past the end of the string.
We skip over the space right there in
the GET request, and then we keep going to
end begins at start, and
then we just keep progressing best there.
And then finally, we have this little bit
of logic there that's basically saying,
okay, if we end in a slash, like we
got to get for a /blog/, that's fine,
just move the sort of where we're ending
back 1 so that we're now on the slash.
If we didn't have a slash there,
then we're gonna write 1
into the original string.
And then finally, we do the memcpy, where
we're basically overwriting whatever was
in the request string originally to get
the index.html plus the null terminator.
So two things we're gonna do here,
one is a little refactor.
So this is not gonna be a bug fix, but
it's basically, hey, try refactoring out
this +1 by modifying the 'if/else' above.
So there's another way
you could express this so
that the math works out
to be the same thing.
We're just basically making end be
in terms of something else, and
that's a totally reasonable way to do it.
You could do it this way or you could
do it where the math that we do for
end is such that we don't need this +1
here because we've sort of accounted for
it earlier.
So let's start off by trying that out, and
then also try not copying in the null
terminator and see what happens.
[LAUGH] If you make the off by 1
error where you forget the +1 here,
what actually ends up happening
to the running program?
Then we have the actual bug fix,
so it says, hey,
these three are currently not trimming
off the leading slash, so fix that bug.
We wanna modify to_path to actually
fix this so that when we print out
should be this with no slash in front,
we actually trim that off.
Okay, then [LAUGH] Before
fixing this next one,
let's try moving it up to the beginning
of main and just see what happens.
So basically, take all this code and just
move it up to the top of main and run it,
and just see what happens.
This is gonna be another example of a fun
behavior that you can get in C if you do
things in the wrong order.
[LAUGH] And yeah, then finally,
we'll fix this one.
So this is the one where we wanted to
print out null, but instead it's actually
printing out "/blog/index.html",
and we're gonna fix that.
>> Richard Feldman: All right,
so initially,
we have some bugs here where we've got
these leading slashes that we don't want,
and then also this last one
is sort of a separate case.
But before we do that, we're gonna
actually do a little bit of a refactoring.
So this is essentially like, okay,
we want to refactor out this +1
by modifying the 'if/else' above.
So essentially what we're
saying here is like, okay,
let's suppose that end at this
point is not gonna be +1.
Well, that means that
by the end of this if,
we want it to have been one
higher than it was otherwise.
So in this case, basically,
we can say, okay, well for
this branch, let's just delete that.
So instead of doing minus, minus,
when we have this scenario,
we're just not gonna do anything, and that
will have the effect of making end be 1
higher by the time we get down here
than it would have otherwise been.
Similarly, on this branch, we can say,
okay, well, end[0] is '/', we still wanna
do that, but then afterwards we want end
to be one further than it would have been.
So we can just do end++ here.
So now when we rerun this,
we should get exactly the same output,
because what we did was
essentially a no op.
And now we can actually just
get rid of that else, and
we can make this instead
of being an if/else,
we can make it just a single if condition,
and that will do exactly the same thing.
This is an example of
how a lot of times in C,
even things like little refactorings just
often involve doing some arithmetic, and
once again, they're a potential
source of off-by-one errors.
When I'm programming in other languages,
or at least when I'm
programming in other languages
and/or not in this type of a style,
I don't tend to be as concerned about
off-by-one errors because I'm doing a lot
more instead of a for loop with ++, I'm
doing a forEach or something like that.
But when we're doing
this type of programming,
off-by-one errors are just a lot more
prevalent and a lot easier to mess up.
If I forgot this ++ right here,
suddenly I rerun this program and,
wait, blog/index.html,
what's going on there?
So it's very easy to end up with
bugs as a consequence of not quite
remembering to do this or just getting
the math off just a little bit.
So something to be aware of.
Okay, so we did that refactor.
Now we're going to try
removing the +1 here.
So this is essentially just now we're
gonna copy over the index.html, but
we're not gonna copy
over the null terminator.
And now essentially what we're seeing
is just the rest of the original HTTP
request that we're stomping over
now becomes visible [LAUGH] And
actually just keeps showing up until we
run into the null terminator that happened
to be in the original one there.
So again, no guardrails,
if we don't remember to copy over the null
terminator, we're just gonna keep
reading that memory until we encounter
our actual null terminator there.
Cool, okay, and
then now we come to our actual bug.
So these three don't currently
trim off the leading slash.
So what we wanna do is
modify to path to fix them.
So right now we're saying, okay,
GET /blog, HTTP, blah, blah, blah, okay?
And what this should be is blog/index.html
without the slash in front of it,
but when we run the program,
it's /blog/index.html.
So essentially, again,
we have an off-by-one error here.
So how do we fix this?
Well, basically what we wanna do is,
we have our sort of start and end here.
So the end is where we end up with,
I'm sorry,
start and end are basically both slashes.
So the start is the slash
at the beginning here, and
then the end is the slash
at the end of this thing.
So if we don't wanna
deal with this anymore,
basically all we need to do is we
just need to move start over by one.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Basically, right here when we're skipping
over the space, what we could do is, yeah,
okay, we'll show it this way.
So let's say I did a second start++.
So this is gonna do two things.
One is that it's basically
skipping over the space here.
So that's good,
that's what we wanted here.
And the other thing that it's doing
is it's also advancing end with this.
So this is sort of,
it means that end begins on start, and
that essentially means that end
is skipping over one thing.
Now, because all we're doing here is
we're just looping until we see a space,
this actually isn't changing
the semantics of our program at all.
Because the only case where this would
matter is if we specifically happen to be,
immediately after the start was either
an null terminator like this or
a space, then this could matter.
But since it's not either of those,
this isn't a problem.
So the other thing that we could do here
is we could combine these two consecutive
++ into a += 2.
That would also work exactly the same way.
And voila, the bug is now fixed.
Cool, so fix that off-by-one error,
introduce some others, fix them, great.
So now, before fixing this now one,
we're gonna try moving it up to the
beginning of main and see what happens.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, so
all I did was move it up there.
Boom, abort, this is one of our
new fun no stack trace errors.
We've seen segfault and bus error,
and now we're seeing abort.
So what's going on there?
And why is it that if I put this code
at the end of the file, or sorry,
at the end of the function, it works fine.
And by the way, if you look at this,
this looks like it should be
pretty self-contained, right?
I'm seeing rec4,
I've got rec1, rec2, rec3 for
the different requests up here, rec4[]=,
and then I just call to_path on rec4.
This doesn't reference any of the rec1,
rec2, or rec3s.
All it references is,
we're calling this function,
we're parsing in this local thing,
and we're not using any globals.
I mean, we're using some string constants,
those aren't a problem.
So what could possibly be happening
[LAUGH] That this thing works?
Well, it gets the wrong answer,
granted, we wanted to see null here.
But it works fine, it runs fine.
But then as soon as I move it
up to the top of the function,
it pulls up the entire program.
Does anyone know what's happening here?
>> Speaker 2: Are we busting our stack?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, [LAUGH]
Basically, we're busting our stack.
So essentially what's happening here
is that I mentioned way back in
the slides about warning icon, and
I said, we're not currently checking
to see what happens if we're reading
off the end of the file here, or sorry,
if we're writing off
the end of the string here.
So we could be saying memcpy into here,
and
the string that we are memcopying into,
the request string might not actually be
long enough to accommodate that index.html
followed by the null terminator.
In other words,
the length of this, end plus this,
might actually be less than what's
remaining in that request string.
And if that's the case, we're just gonna
uncritically just blow over it and
just write into whatever bytes are there,
and then we're just gonna
find out what happens.
So basically,
this is designed to simulate that, right?
So I've intentionally omitted the header
that would normally be there if this were
coming from a browser where it
would have the protocol as well
as at least one header.
I omitted those on purpose in
order to cause this error.
And so basically,
what's happening here is that this is
allocating these bytes on the stack.
So it's like, here's an array in memory,
in the function.
And then this thing is going to
actually write into those bytes, and
it's gonna happily just write right off
the end of those because there isn't
enough room here for index.html.
So whatever happens to be in memory there,
that's what's gonna get stomped on and
overwritten.
And the reason it behaves differently, if
I put it at the end of the function versus
earlier, is that whatever happens to be
there after those bytes changes depending
on whether I'm doing this at
the beginning of the function or the end.
And the reason the program's blowing up is
that, up here, when we get to those bytes,
the processor or the operating system,
it tries to do something when
those bytes are overridden that results
in some sort of operating system error.
So I don't actually know specifically
what those bites are doing or
what the exact thing is.
You'd have to look at the actual
assembly to try to figure that out.
But it's probably something along
the lines of, remember I mentioned at
the very beginning that there was some
assembly that we were omitting for
the boilerplate of beginning of functions.
And the boilerplate is basically stuff
like, looking at what the arguments are,
getting those out of the global variables
into the registers, or storing them,
storing where the function's gonna
return to and things like that.
And that type of stuff, if you mess around
with that and you override those bytes,
you can very easily end up with
a function that when it returns, instead
of just happily going back, it just jumps
to some wildly other part of the program.
And that's probably what's happening here,
is this, when it's at the end here,
is overwriting some memory that
appears to be pretty harmless and
you can't even notice that there's a bug.
And if you move it up here instead,
now it's overwriting bytes that are not
harmless at all and
are instead blowing up the entire program.
This is another example of memory unsafety
in C, a new flavor that we haven't seen
yet, where you can just take code
that does one thing and works,
as far as you can tell,
totally normally, and
then as soon as you just move it up
somewhere else, all hell breaks loose.
So you can very easily in C have
something that looks like a normal,
harmless refactor where you're
literally just moving code around and
all of a sudden your whole program
blows up with no stack trace.
Hey, welcome to C [LAUGH].
So what this is an example of is this is
an example of something where you don't
know that there's a problem because
there are no symptoms normally.
When you run this program, okay, I mean,
we know that there's a bug here,
in that I expect it to be something
other than what it's printing, but
it kinda does look like it did the thing.
There's no sort of surface-level symptom
to give us even a clue that we're making
this memory unsafety bug.
And this is one of the things that
makes memory safety bugs so pernicious,
is that in a lot of cases,
there's a lot of different factors
that go into reproducing it.
Another thing I haven't tried, but
if you played around with using different
compiler optimization settings to build
this, compiler optimizations will often
rearrange things inside the function
in ways that it assumes are harmless,
assuming your code is actually
doing the right thing.
Another possibility is that these things
could end up with the memory being in such
a place that this code works fine,
that as soon as you run the optimizer,
it blows up.
And you might blame the optimizer and say
the optimizer must have a bug in it, but
it might not.
The reason that it might be blowing up
is just that the bug was always there.
You just weren't happening to see any
symptom because the memory it was stomping
over happened to be harmless until
you kicked in the optimizations, and
then it happened to be overriding
memory that was not harmless.
So there's this whole can of
worms to memory safety bugs,
that doesn't this make you appreciate it,
having a garbage collector?
Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: You are debug these kinda
things with stack canaries and like.
>> Richard Feldman: Yes,
if that's what the problem is, yeah.
So a stack canary, [LAUGH] Basically,
it's a trick where you attempt to
detect when you are making the mistake of,
so the stack is a part of
memory that's reserved for
local variables inside of functions.
And as you call more and more functions,
that section of memory just
gets bigger and bigger.
And a stack canary is where
you basically say, okay,
I'm a little bit concerned
that I might have a bug.
Or maybe some malicious attacker is trying
to create a bug where we are writing way
past the end of the stack or
reading way past the end of the stack.
And what you can do to guard against this
is you do, it's making a guard page,
where basically one of the things you can
tell the operating system is you can say,
hey, this chunk of memory,
please mark that as read only.
So it's not innately read only like it
is if it's something that's part of
the executable, but please say this whole
range of addresses, if I ever write to or
read from those,
I want you to cause a segfault.
I want that to happen because nobody
should ever be writing in there.
So you intentionally put one of those
at the end of the stack and you say,
this is segfault zone.
If anybody ever sets foot in here, reads
or writes, I guess it's only writes to,
tries to write in there,
don't make the write happen, just blow up.
And so then if you do that,
that can give you more of a clue.
Well, first of all, it can be a safety
thing where you don't want the attacker to
do something even worse than that.
You'd rather blow up and
let them get access to whatever
they're trying to get access to.
Yeah, there's this thing called
a stack-smashing attack,
which is a whole [LAUGH] Thing
that we're not going to get into.
But yeah, that is one example of a thing
you can do to not prevent the bug, but
at least give you a clue of
what's actually happening there.
Okay, yeah, and then the last thing we're
gonna do is we're gonna fix this by
handling the case where rec is too short
to have "index.html" memcop'd into it.
Hint, strlen returns an integer whose
type is not 'int', but rather 'size_t'.
This is a hint, because as you're fixing
this, we do actually need to do this,
we're going to encounter
this compiler error.
So basically, what's happening
here is we are saying, okay,
I want to detect whether or
not we are going to write over this, and
if we are going to write over this,
then let's blow up instead.
So basically we've got our length of
the thing that we're copying in and
we've got our starting point.
And what we wanna do is we wanna say,
okay, well,
the last byte that we're gonna copy
is gonna be end + this, right?
So this is the initial address, and
then we're gonna copy all
the way to the end of that.
So the condition we wanna detect
is if all of that is greater than
strlen(req), then we wanna
just return null, basically.
There are other ways we can handle this.
We could say, well,
we'll just partially write it.
But partially writing it in this
case is not a good solution here,
because what's actually gonna
happen here if we do that is,
we're gonna end up with essentially
a path that was partially written,
and it's not going to correspond
anything on the file system.
So we don't wanna do that,
we'd rather just error out here.
Yeah, it's complaining about this.
This is just a warning,
but it's kinda fine.
So what we can do if we wanna avoid that
warning is, I think this is pointer,
yeah, so we can just say this is,
was it size_t I think.
Is that right?
Yeah, cool, there we go.
Oops, no, now they're all null.
I must have made a mistake.
So end + strlen(DEFAULT_FILE) +
1 is greater than strlen(req).
I'm sorry.
Okay, so this is actually, I wanna
check if we are off the end of that.
So what I actually wanna do is req + that,
and this will also need to be size_t.
Yeah, so this is the start of the request
plus the end, that gives us the last byte.
And we wanna see if the last byte that
we're gonna write is off the end of that.
There we go.
So yeah, now all of these
are unaffected because in these cases,
they are not trying to write
past the end of the request.
This one was though,
because we had that intentionally
truncated request that's missing headers,
and so therefore it tripped up the null
case, and now we're returning null.
And thankfully, now,
this bug is fixed, and
we can safely move this thing up
to the top of the function and
nothing bad will happen, because it's
just gonna trip that null case again.
And the only difference is that now it
prints at the beginning rather than at
the end cuz we moved it up.